---
layout: post
title: QSS 23 Lesson 1 - Single Systems
date: 2023-11-30
description: In this post, I will share my thoughts to the first lesson of the Qiskit Summer School 2023.
tags: qss23
categories: sample-posts
related_posts: false
---
$$
\renewcommand{\bra}[1]{\left \langle #1 \right|}
\renewcommand{\ket}[1]{\left| #1 \right \rangle}
\renewcommand{\braket}[2]{\left \langle #1 \middle| #2 \right \rangle}
\newcommand{\sqdotfive}{\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}}
$$

# Summary

## Dirac notation
To use the Dirac notation to describe states, one must order the state set $$\Sigma$$ and **stick to the ordering**. In programming, this is like converting a tuple to a list:
```cpp
std::tuple set = {0, 1};
ordered = std::to_list(tuple);
```

$$\ket{a}$$ ("ket a") is a column vector having a 1 at the position of $$a$$ in the ordered state set $$\Sigma$$, and all other entries 0. Programmatically, this is
```cpp
std::vector<int> ket(T a, ordered) {
	std::vector<int> vec;
	for(T el : ordered) {
		if(a = el) {
			vec.push_back(1);
		} else {
			vec.push_back(0);
		}
	}
	return vec;
}
```
$$\bra{a}$$ ("bra a") has the same definition, only that it is a row vector.

### Connections between bra and ket
$$\braket{a}{b} = \bra{a}\ket{b} = \left \lbrace \begin{matrix}
	1 & a=b \\
	0 & a\neq b
\end{matrix} \right. \\$$

$$\ket{a}\bra{b} = \begin{pmatrix}
	x_{1,1} & x_{1,...} & x_{1,m} \\
	x_{...,1} & \vdots & x_{...,m} \\
	x_{n,1} & x_{n,...} & x_{n,m} \\
\end{pmatrix} = \left \lbrace \begin{matrix}
	x_{i,j}=1 & (i,j) = (a,b) \\
	x_{i,j}=0 & (i,j) \neq (a,b)
\end{matrix} \right.$$



***

## Classical Information
We are going to work with a single system called $$X$$. $$X$$ has a set of classical states $$\Sigma$$.
Systems can have a *probabilistic state*, that means the probabilities to be in certain states may differ.

Example: $$X$$ is a bit, with $$\Sigma=\lbrace 0;1 \rbrace$$. If X's probabilistic state is expressed as the *probability vector*
$$
\begin{pmatrix}
	0.75 \\
	0.25 \\
\end{pmatrix}
$$,
it means that X has a 75% chance to be in state 0 and a 25% chance to be in state 1.

Requirements of probability vectors:
* all entries must be nonnegative real numbers.
* the sum of all entries is 1.

The probability vector can be written in the Dirac notation like so: $$0.75 \ket{0} + 0.25 \ket{1}$$

### Deterministic operations
Operations that represent a function $$f: \Sigma \rightarrow \Sigma$$ are described as matrices of the form
$$
M(b) = \sum_{b\epsilon\Sigma}\ket{f(b)}\bra{b}
$$

Operations can be probabilistic as well. They are described as *stochastic matrices*. Requirements:
* All entries are nonnegative real numbers
* Every column sums up to 1

A matrix product of two stochastic matrices will result in a stochastic matrices.
## Quantum Information

### Types of descriptions
There are two ways to describe quantum information. The first is simpler and more intuitive, but has certain limitations, the other is more complex but general.
#### the simplified one
In the simplified description, quantum states are represented as vectors and operations on quantum states are represented as unitary matrices.
#### the general one
In the general description, quantum states are represented as so called *density matrices*. It is mathematically defines as 
$$
\rho = \sum_j p_j \ket{\psi_j} \bra{\psi_j}
$$

, with $$\ket{\psi_j}$$ being a pure (or base) state and $$p_j$$ being its corresponding probability. That basically means, you calculate the matrix product of $$\psi$$ with itself, multiply it with the probability and accumulate this term for all pure states. It seems like a second dimension is added to the quantum state vector. Density matrices will be relevant in Unit 3, but I am already curious. 

### Quantum state vectors
A quantum state is expressed as a column vector $$v$$, analagous to classical state vectors, BUT:
* entries $$v$$ of are complex numbers (*amplitudes*)
* the euclidean norm $$||v||$$ must be 1. That means it must be a *unit vector*.

Examples:
$$
\begin{align}
	\ket{+} &= \sqdotfive \ket{0} + \sqdotfive \ket{1} \\
	\ket{-} &= \sqdotfive \ket{0} - \sqdotfive \ket{1} \\
\end{align}
$$

### Standard basis measurements
The probability of a classical state to be the outcome of the measurement is **the absolute value squared of the amplitude/entry** for that classical state

### Unitary operations
Operations on quantum states are represented as unitary matrices.

A matrix $$U$$ is *unitary* if it  satisfies the equalities
$$
U^\dagger U = \mathbb{1} = U U^\dagger \\
||Uv|| = ||v||
$$
, where $$U^\dagger$$ is the conjugate transpose of $$U$$ and $$\mathbb{1}$$ is the identity matrix.

Examples:

Hadamard: $$H = \begin{pmatrix}
	\sqdotfive & \sqdotfive \\
	\sqdotfive & -\sqdotfive
\end{pmatrix}$$

Phase operations: $$P_\theta = \begin{pmatrix}
	1 & 0 \\
	0 & e^{i\theta}
\end{pmatrix}\\
S = P_{\pi/2}\\
T = P_{\pi/4}$$

The matrix product of two unitary operations will result in a unitary matrix.